So now that we've seen that
functions are objects in JavaScript.
We're going to see how the JavaScript
programming language lets us do some
really interesting and
powerful things with this concept.
The concept of first class functions.
To start we need to
understand the difference and
the usage of function statements and
function expressions.
Well, that sounds complicated.
It isn't.
Big word alert.
An expression.
An expression is a unit of
code that results in a value.
And that's it.
So when we say a function statement,
statements just do work.
But a function expression or
any expression in JavaScript
ends up creating a value and
that value doesn't necessarily
have to save inside a variable.
All right, let's look at an example.
So I have my empty app,js file and
I'm just going to declare a variable,
let's just say a.
Now I'm going to run this, and
I'll open a console here in Google Chrome.
Now I have a sitting there in memory, and
I can write some code on
the fly here in the console.
So, what is an expression?
We said an expression returns a value.
So I have a unit of codes,
code that I've written.
And that unit,
essentially a line of code, although it
can be split into multiple physical lines,
sometimes it's run as a unit.
I have a unit of code,
I'm setting a equal three.
Remember that equals is an operator,
a function that takes these two values,
does some work and then returns a value.
So this will return three because I passed
a on the left side and three on the other.
And it returns whatever
is on the right side.
The second parameter.
So, I run that, and I get a value back.
Three.
Because the equals
operator returns a value.
This happens to set some values in memory,
but
I can run a different
expression like one plus two.
This is a valid expression.
And the plus sign as an operator,
takes these two values, and adds them, and
returns the result.
And I can run it, and it just happens
to return three in this case,
but notice that I didn't set it
equal to anything in memory.
So the expression evaluated.
That is to say it ran and
returned this value, this result here.
But I didn't do anything with that value.
But in both cases this is an expression.
Because it returned a value.
Get that?
That line of code results in a value.
Now that value could be a number or
a string or an object, whatever the case.
But it's still ends up being a value.
So I could go a equals, and I'll use
an object literal greeting hi, and
it still works the same way.
It puts it into memory and
the equals operator returns a value.
Got that?
So when we're talking about a statement,
on the other hand,
let's say I do an if statement,
If a equals three and then do something.
Inside the parentheses of an if statement,
you put an expression because
that results in a value.
But the if statement itself
is just a statement.
It's called an if statement
because it doesn't return a value.
I can't say variable b equals and
then if, because this just does work.
No value is returned.
The if is a statement, and inside the if
statement you have an expression,
because the expression this triple equals
returns a value ultimately true or false.
Get that.
So statement just does work and
an expression results in a value.
In JavaScript, because functions are
objects, I have both function statements
and function expressions,
which are extraordinarily powerful.
Let's show the difference.
I'll clear this out.
I'm going to do a function statement.
I'll make a function called greet and
I'll console.log('hi').
This is a function statement.
When it's run, when it's evaluated,
it doesn't result in a value.
The function is placed into memory,
but it's just a statement.
It doesn't return a value until
the function is executed.
So when I see this, it does say okay,
I'm putting the function in memory.
But this unit of code
doesn't result in a value.
But it does do some special things.
We've already seen that it gets hoisted.
That is, during the creation
phase of the execution context,
the global execution context,
in this case, it's put into memory.
And so it's available ahead of time.
I can call greet before I declare it,
before I make that function's statement.
So it's available to me in memory.
That's fine.
It's still an object.
It's name is greet and its code property
contains the code you wrote inside of it.
Now I'm going to use
a function expression, watch.
I'll type a variable name,
let's call this anonymousGreet.
I use the equals operator.
And here I could put a number or
a string or an object,
maybe using the object literal syntax.
Instead I'll use a function expression.
I'll say function and
then I'll give myself some
whitespace just to make it clear.
I'll make the same function.
Now wait a minute, does that look strange?
What are we doing?
Well remember functions in
JavaScript are objects.
So I'm creating an object on the fly and
setting it equal to this variable.
That is this variable,
it's spot in memory that it points to.
It's address in memory that it points
to will contain a function object.
Make sense?
So what's really going on here?
Well, remember what happened.
Let's look at our function declaration
again, our function statement.
This is the one that gets
pulled up into memory
when the execution context is created.
And it has this name property, and
this code property, that get set.
So I have an object in memory,
the name is greet, because that's where I
put before before those parentheses,
and it has a line of code.
And when I call it.
It's connected to that spot in memory
where this function object lives,
and those parens then invoke
the code part of the function.
Now what about my function expression?
In this case, I have an equals operator
that's putting this object into memory.
And pointing that anonymous
greet variable at that address.
Remember, it's not really looking
at the name of the function or
anything like that.
It knows the address in memory just like
you have an address for where you live.
So we still get a function object.
The JavaScript engine creates one.
And in this case I didn't have a name.
Because, I didn't put anything before
the parenthesis, and I don't have to.
Because, I have a variable that
already knows where that object lives.
So, I don't need a name
to reference it by.
So this is an anonymous function.
You may have heard that phrase.
That's all this really means.
An anonymous function is a function that
doesn't have a name in it's name property.
But that's okay,
because you can reference it with
variable names that are pointing to
the address where that object lives.
And we have the same code property,
the same line of code is inside of there.
So how do we invoke this function?
We need to point at the object.
And then tell it to run its code.
Can you guess?
That's right.
The variable is already
pointing to where it lives.
And then I put parentheses,
which invokes the code.
So if I do that here, anonymousGreet and
then parentheses, and run this.
That runs the same code as well.
So I use an anonymous
function in this case.
And this right here by itself.
In this case, is an expression.
Because it results in a value.
I end up with the function object when
this part of the code is evaluated,
or considered, or executed.
This is just a function statement.
Because when the code is executing,
even though this function
has been placed into memory.
When this part is actually run
through in the execution phase,
it doesn't really do anything.
It just says, oh yeah,
there's a function there.
It keeps going.
When this line is executed.
This statement results in
an object being created.
It returns an object essentially.
So it's an expression.
It results in a value.
The value being a new function object.
And I can make this anonymous.
You might think well why
shouldn't I have a name there?
Well, that's a lot to type, why bother?
Good code is about being clear and
understandable,
while at the same time minimizing
the amount of code that we need to write.
So, the anonymous function is great for
this.
It's very clear that I'm
creating a function object.
And it's not difficult to understand
how to invoke, how to call it.
How to run the function.
Now, that said, let me ask you a question.
If I move this line above this line.
Just like I did for
calling greet before it was
created here in the statement,
in the code.
This worked.
What do you think will happen here and
why?
Think about what you know about
the execution context being created,
and then execute it.
Executing code line by line.
Knowing that it puts function statements,
and variables into memory first.
And what it does with variables
when it puts them into memory And
the how it runs line by
line through the code.
What do you expect to see?
We already know that this will say hi.
Because it will call this function,
it's in memory.
What do you think you'll see here?
Uncaught TypeError:
undefined is not a function.
Did that surprise you?
Well it shouldn't.
Remember that this is hoisted.
Meaning when the JavaScript engine sees
the word function on a new line by itself,
it says oh,
you're creating a function here.
And I'll put it in memory.
But here it sees a variable.
It puts it into memory and
what does it set the variable equal to
before it starts executing the code?
All variables.
That's right.
The special primitive called undefined.
And then it begins to run the code.
So it runs greet, and it says,
oh yes, I have that in memory.
Then it sees the function statement,
nothing to do there really.
And then it sees this, and it says, oh,
I see that in memory, it's undefined.
Because we haven't hit the line where
it's set equal to anything yet.
And then we just tried to invoke
it as if it was a function.
And JavaScript said nope.
The undefined primitive is not a function.
It isn't until this line of
code where it's set equal
to this new function object that's
created when it sees this code.
So function expressions aren't hoisted.
And that can confuse people.
But if we think about it from the
perspective of how JavaScript does this
under the hood,
it's not really surprising.
It just only hoisted the variable.
And so the variable doesn't contain an
object until this line of code is run in
the execution phase.
So, I have to then have
it first set equal.
So that it's sitting in memory.
And then I can invoke it, like this.
Make sense?
All right, I'll put this above as well so
we can see the difference.
Undefined is not a function.
Now when I remove it one more time.
It runs just fine.
Because at this point,
this equals operator has been run.
And it's put the result of this statement,
a new function object, into this variable.
That is this variable
points to a spot in memory.
And inside that spot in your computer's
memory, is sitting this function object.
All right, so
let's do one more cool thing.
I'm gonna create a new function using
a function statement called log.
It'll just take a variable.
Let's say variable a.
And I'm going to console.log,
whatever is passed into the function.
Now I'm going to then call this function.
If I pass a number,
what's going to happen?
Well it'll get that number and output it.
And I'm just creating this on the fly.
I didn't create a variable.
And then pass the variable,
although I could.
I'm just creating that value on the fly.
So when I run this I see three.
That makes sense.
What about a string?
Hello.
I'm just creating this string on the fly.
I could set a variable.
And then pass that variable,
but I don't have to.
I can just create the string on the fly.
This is a string literal.
I use quotes.
I could use single quotes if I wanted, and
that string is created, and
the function outputs it.
The function got it as a parameter.
What about an object?
Well, we've already seen that I can use
curly braces, and create myself an object.
So I might go, greeting: hi, and
it just has single name value pair in
this case, but the object is created.
I could, set it equal to a variable,
and pass that variable,
but I can just create
the object on the fly.
So, greeting: hi, but
it's inside that object.
The object was created.
Name value pair.
All right.
So that's great.
But, remember what we just learned.
A function is an object.
And a function expression creates
an object, a function object on the fly.
So, I can do something
that looks really strange.
I can say function, and
create a function on the fly.
See what I did?
This works an awful lot
like an object literal.
I'm creating a function on the fly,
putting some code, it creates that object.
Puts that code into that code
property of that function object.
It's just like a string,
or a number, an object.
I'm just creating a function on the fly,
because functions are objects.
And so
that will get passed to the function.
And look, it has the function.
It's anonymous, but
it's referenced with that a parameter.
See how that works?
First class functions,
functions that can be passed around,
created on the fly, used, and
variables can be set equal to them.
That's pretty neat.
So, if I want to then invoke this
function, the a parameter now points at
a spot in memory, where this has been
created, when I called the log function.
It passed a function to a function, which
is something you can do in JavaScript, and
other languages that work like JavaScript,
when it comes to functions.
So I passed a function to a function, so
now I have this a property, and
it's pointing at a function object.
So how do I get it to run?
How can I run this function that
I created, and gave to log?
Well I just go parentheses, right?
That tells the JavaScript engine
to invoke, or run the function.
Take a really good look at this.
I'm calling log, and passing a function,
using a function expression,
creating the function right there,
inside the parentheses where I'm
passing it to here, and so
a now is this function.
It points to a spot in memory that
contains this function object, and
I can just tell it,
okay now invoke your code, run your code.
So what am I going to see?
There's that third hi.
Get it?
So, I have a function statement,
hoisted into memory,
during the creation phase
of the execution context.
I have a function expression here,
that's used as part of the equals
operator, to set it equal to a variable.
Then I can use that variable to invoke it.
And I have a function expression,
that I'm passing a function,
as a parameter to another function.
And then I can use it.
This concept of first class functions
then, where you can pass functions around,
give functions to other functions,
use them like you do variables,
introduces an entirely
new class of programming,
called functional programming.
And we'll talk about that in a bit.
But just for now, realize that,
when you see this style
of syntax, it's a function expression, and
it's available because of
first class functions.
Because functions in
JavaScript are objects.